\thispagestyle{empty}
\topskip0pt
\vspace*{\fill} \section*{Abstract}

Integrating weather-dependent renewable energy sources into the electricity
system imposes challenges on the power grid. Balancing services are needed which
can be provided by virtual power plants (VPP) that aggregate distributed energy
resources (DER) to consume or produce electricity on demand. Electric vehicle
(EV) fleets can use the batteries of idle cars as combined storage to offer
balancing services on smart electricity markets. However, there are risks
associated with this business model extension. The fleet faces severe imbalance
penalties if it can not charge the offered amount of balancing energy due to
unpredicted mobility demand of the vehicles. Ensuring the fleet can fulfill all
market commitments risks denying profitable customer rentals. We study the
design of a decision support system that estimates these risks, dynamically
adjusts the composition of a VPP portfolio, and profitably places bids on
multiple electricity markets simultaneously. Here we show that a
\emph{Reinforcement Learning} (RL) agent can optimize the VPP portfolio by
learning from favorable market conditions and fleet demand uncertainties. In
comparison to previous research, in which the bidding risks were unknown and
fleets could only offer conservative amounts of balancing power to a single
market, our proposed approach increases the amount of offered balancing power by
$48\% - 82\%$  and achieves a charging cost reduction of the fleet by 25\%. In
experiments with real-world carsharing data of 500 EVs, we found that the
accuracy of mobility demand forecasting algorithms is crucial for a successful
bidding strategy. Moreover, we show that recent advancements in RL decrease
the convergence time and improve the robustness of the results. Our results
demonstrate how modern RL algorithms can be successfully used for fleet
management, VPP optimization, and demand response in the smart grid. We
anticipate that DER, such as EVs, will play an essential role in providing
reliable back up power for the grid and formulate market design recommendations
to allow easier access to these resources.

\vspace*{\fill}
\clearpage
