* Empirical Setting
This research is embedded in the German carsharing and electricity markets. We
find that Germany is a suitable test bed for our experiments, since it has a
comparably high share of renewables in its energy mix and is pushing for an
energy turnaround (German: /Energiewende/) since 2010
cite:bmu10_energ_concep_envir_sound_reliab_affor The comparatively high
renewable energy content in the energy mix causes electricity prices to be more
volatile, which makes Germany an attractive location for VPP activities.

#+INCLUDE: "~/uni/ma-thesis/template/car2go_tables.tex" export latex

Germany is home to the carsharing providers Car2Go[fn:1] and DriveNow[fn:2],
which operate large EV fleets across the globe. It has been argued that electric
carsharing can simultaneously solve several traditional mobility and
environmental problems and are an important element of future smart cities
cite:firnkorn15_free_float_elect_carsh_fleet_smart_cities. Further, it is widely
regarded that the future of mobility will be electric, shared, smart and
eventually autonomous cite:burns13_sustain_mobil,sterling18_three_revol.
Carsharing providers are already contributing to the first two points by
operating large fleets of electric vehicles. This thesis addresses the third
point: Using electric carsharing fleets to smartly participate in electricity
markets. Carsharing providers, like Car2Go and DriveNow, operate their
carsharing fleets in a free-float model, which allows customers to pick up and
drop vehicles at any place within the operating zone of the provider. The
free-float concept adds additional complexity to our research, since the
mobility patterns are inherently uncertain and difficult to predict. Customers
of Car2Go or DriveNow pay by the minute and are offered incentives to park the
EVs at charging stations at the end of their trip.

We obtained real-world trip data from the carsharing service Car2Go, and
collected freely available balancing market data from the GCRM platform
website[fn:3] The data of the EPEX Spot market have kindly been provided by
ProCom GmbH[fn:4] for research purposes. In the next chapters the different
data sets are described, as well the most important processing steps outlined.

** Electronic Vehicle Fleet Data label:sec-data-car2go
# NOTE: Here only description of data, no general blabla
The Car2Go data set consists of GPS data of around 500 Smart ED3 Fortwo vehicles
in Stuttgart. These subcompact cars are equipped with a 17.6 kWh battery and a
standard 3.6 kW on-board charger. They fully charge in about six to seven hours
and can reach a maximum driving distance of 145 km according to the manufacturer.
When equipped with an additional 22 kW fast charger the charging time reduces to
about an hour.

In Table ref:table-car2go-raw the raw data is displayed as we have obtained it
by Car2Go. The data set contains spatio-temporal attributes, such as timestamp,
coordinates, and the address of the EVs in 5-minute intervals. Additionally,
status attributes of the interior and exterior are given, which are not
displayed in the table. Especially relevant for our research is the state of
charge ($SoC$, in %) and information whether the EV is plugged into a charging
station or parked at a regular parking spot. Note that the data only contain EVs
that are /available for rent/, meaning that they are currently not rented out by
a customer. EVs which are plugged into a charging station are also not available
until they have charged up to approximately 70% SoC. For further analysis,
individual trips had to be reconstructed using the GPS data of the cars,
moreover we inferred travelled trip distances and rental prices based on Car2Go
specifications. See Appendix ref:app-data-processing for a detailed listing of
the executed preprocessing steps.

** Balancing Market Data label:sec-data-balancing
We use market balancing data from the German secondary reserve market, which
contain weekly lists of anonymized bids between June 1, 2016 and January 1, 2018 and a
data set of activated control reserve in Germany during the same period. The
bidding data consist of the traded electricity product, the offered balancing
power $\Pb{}$ (MW), the capacity price $\cp{}$ ($\emw$), and the energy price
$\ep{}$ ($\emwh$) of each bid. Four different products are traded, which are a
combination of positive control reserve (POS) or negative control reserve (NEG)
and the provided time segment, peak hours (HT) or non-peak hours (NT). Since
negative prices are allowed on the secondary operating reserve market, the
payment direction is included as well. Moreover, information about the amount of
capacity that was accepted, either partially or fully, is listed. Bids, which
were not accepted by the TSOs are not listed. An exemplary excerpt of the data
set is displayed in Table ref:table-operating-reserve.



#+CAPTION[Secondary Operating Reserve Market Data]: List of bids of the German secondary reserve market for the tender period December 4, 2017 to December 11, 2017. label:table-operating-reserve
#+ATTR_LATEX: :environment longtable :align c|ccccc :placement [htbp]
|---------+----------------+--------------+---------------+---------+----------|
|---------+----------------+--------------+---------------+---------+----------|
| Product | Capacity Price | Energy Price | Payment       | Offered | Accepted |
|---------+----------------+--------------+---------------+---------+----------|
| NEG-HT  |              0 |          1.1 | TSO to bidder |       5 |        5 |
| NEG-HT  |          10.73 |          251 | TSO to bidder |      15 |       15 |
| NEG-HT  |          200.3 |          564 | TSO to bidder |      22 |       22 |
| ...     |            ... |          ... | ...           |     ... |      ... |
| NEG-NT  |              0 |         21.9 | Bidder to TSO |       5 |        5 |
| NEG-NT  |              0 |         22.4 | Bidder to TSO |       5 |        5 |
| ...     |            ... |          ... | ...           |     ... |      ... |
| POS-NT  |          696.6 |         1200 | TSO to bidder |       5 |        5 |
| POS-NT  |         717.12 |         1210 | TSO to bidder |      10 |        7 |
|---------+----------------+--------------+---------------+---------+----------|
|---------+----------------+--------------+---------------+---------+----------|

In this study, we assume that bidding on 15-minute intervals in secondary
operating reserve auctions will be possible in future energy markets. As
mentioned in Chapter ref:sec-balancing-market, the market design of the GCRM
secondary operating reserve tender was adjusted in 2017. Daily tenders with
4-hour bidding intervals were introduced in favor of weekly tenders with only
two time segments. This change represents the trend by the TSOs to change the
market design in order to better include RES into the operating reserve markets
cite:agricola14_dena_ancil_servic_study. Due to the volatility of renewable
electricity generation, providers are naturally dependent on accurate short-term
forecasts, which are only possible with short tender periods and fine-grained
bidding intervals.

In order to estimate the upper bound of profits that the EV fleet can earn by
participating in the secondary operating reserve market, the /critical prices/
$\ccp{}$ and $\cep{}$ were determined for each auctioned interval. Following
textcite:brandt17_evaluat_busin_model_vehic_grid_integ, we define $\ccp{}$
($\emw$) as the capacity price of the bid that was just barely accepted, whereas
$\cep{}$ ($\emwh$) is the highest energy price that was payed for activated
control reserve during that interval. For every 15-minute interval within the
given tender period of one week, the activated control reserve in that interval
was matched with the accepted bids in that tender period. At the point where
supply (offered capacity of bids) meets demand (activated balancing power), the
critical price $\cep{}$ was determined.

/Example/: The critical prices for the secondary operating reserve tender
interval of the 6^{th} December 2017 between 08:00 and 08:15 were obtained as
follows: Three suppliers submitted a negative reserve capacity of 5, 15 and 22
MW respectively (see Table ref:table-operating-reserve, first three rows). The
critical capacity price $\ccp{}\!=\!200.3\emw$ is determined by the capacity
price of the last (third) accepted bid in that time segment. The TSO reported
that 18 MW of control reserve were activated between 08:00 and 08:15. Hence, the
second bid determines the critical energy price $\cep{}\!=\!251\emwh$, as
control reserve capacity gets activated according to ascending order of the
submitted energy prices. The second bidder would get compensated for the offered
balancing capacity plus the actually provided balancing energy:
$(10.73\emw\!\times\!15\;\mw) +
(251\emwh\!\times13\;\mw\!\times\!0.25\;\text{h})\!=\! 976.7\;\eur$. Note that
the second bidder would get compensated for providing 13 MW for 15 minutes (0.25
h), instead of the submitted 15 MW, since 5 MW of the total 18 MW of activated
control capacity were already provided by the first bidder.

#+BEGIN_SRC python :exports none
    return((10.73*15)+(251*13*0.25))
#+END_SRC

#+RESULTS:
: 976.7

#+CAPTION[Critical electricity prices]: Daily critical electricity market prices (average, standard deviation) from June 2016 to January 2018. Highly volatile prices, e.g., between 12:00 and 14:00, demonstrate the benefits of an integrated trading strategy, which considers trading on both markets depending on the market conditions. label:fig-price-comparison
#+ATTR_LATEX: :width 1\linewidth :placement [htb]
[[../fig/critical-prices.png]]

** Intraday Market Data label:sec-data-intraday
The data from the EPEX Spot Intraday Continuous encompass order books and
executed trades from June 1, 2016 until December 1, 2018. An extract of the data
can be found in Appendix ref:app-data-tables. The list of trades contains
information on the unit price $\up{}$ ($\emwh$), the quantity (kW) and the
traded product (hourly, quarterly or block). In this research, we focus on
quarterly product times (15-minute intervals), as they provide the highest
flexibility. Fleet controllers can promptly react to fluctuant electricity
demand of the EV fleet by accurately adjusting the bid quantities. Future
research could also consider other electricity products if lower prices justify
the decreased flexibility at that point in time.

On the spot market, electricity trades can have a very short lead time of up to
5 minutes before delivery. This market characteristic is beneficial for our
proposed trading strategy, since it allows the EV to procure electricity in
almost real time. The controller can submit bids to the market, with accurate
estimations of available charging capacity up to five minutes ahead. Similarly
to the balancing market, the critical price $\cup{}$ has to be determined for
all intraday trading intervals. The critical unit price $\cup{}$ is defined as
the lowest price of all executed trades.
\begin{equation*}
    \cup{} \defeq \min_{t \in \cal{T}} \up{t} \text{ ,}
\end{equation*}
where $\cal{T}$ is the set of all trades in a bidding interval. /Example:/ The
critical unit price of the trades listed in Appendix ref:app-data-tables is
$\cup{} \!=\!51.00 \emwh$ (trades 8031392, 8031387 and 8031375). All buyers that
submitted bids with a price higher than the critical unit price successfully
procured electricity. Hence, accurate forecasts of the critical price allow to
optimize the bidding behavior.

In Figure ref:fig-price-comparison, a market comparison of the calculated
critical prices of both presented data sets is depicted. The high standard
deviation (error bands) of the prices illustrate the price volatility and
highlights the possibility to profitably combine trading on both markets
simultaneously.

#+LATEX: \clearpage

* Footnotes

[fn:1] https://www.car2go.com

[fn:2] https://www.drive-now.com

[fn:3] https://regelleistung.net

[fn:4] https://procom-energy.de
